part3.md, before:

## Section 3: Access S3 and scale up your analysis vertically

In Parts 1 and 2, you tested the SimpleVM environment and the tools required for our analysis.
Now it is time to use a VM with more cores to scale up the analysis vertically. 

In the previous part, you saved your installed tools by creating a snapshot.
If the snapshot upload has not been completed, we have prepared a snapshot for you. You will now reuse this snapshot with a larger flavour.
Next, we will search for more metagenomic datasets via object storage and scale up our analysis by allocating more cores.

### 3.1 Create a new VM based on your snapshot

1. Click on **Snapshots** in left menu and check which status
   your snapshot has. You can also filter of the name in the top menu. 
   If it has the status `active`, you can click on the snapshot to open the dropdown menu and click on start to spawn a new VM.
   In case your snapshot is still not active just choose the **SimpleVMGCB-de32e** snapshot. You will now be redirected to the **Create new Instance** page with a
   preselected snapshot.
   ![](figures/snapshot_overview.png)

2. Provide again a name for your instance. Please use your name without any spaces (e.g. Max Mustermann -> MaxMusterman).

3. In the flavors sections please choose the **de.NBI large** flavor which has 28 cores available.
   ![](figures/large_flavor.png)

4. Please create a volume for your VM and enter your name without whitespace 
   (Example: Max Mustermann -> MaxMusterman) as the volume name. 
   Enter `data` (`/vol/data`) as mountpath and provide 1 GB as the storage size.
   Don't forget to click on `Add Volume`. 
   ![](figures/createVolume.png)

5. Grant access to the workshop organizers. This way the organizers get ssh access to your VM and can help you in case something does not work as expected. 
   ![](figures/grantAccess.png)

6. Confirm the checkbox and click on **Start Instance**.
   ![](figures/start_instance.png)

### 3.2 Interact with the SRA Mirror and search for more datasets to analyze

1. You are now on the **Instances** page. You can delete your old VM which is stopped and
   we used to create your snapshot. To do this, open the dropdown of the old machine again
   and select **Delete**. Confirm the deletion of the machine.
   ![](figures/deleteOldVM.png)
   
2. On your new VM, select again the link to access Theia IDE.
   ![](figures/howtoconnectbig.png)

3. Click on `Terminal` in the upper menu and select `New Terminal`.
   ![](figures/terminal.png)

4. Activate the conda environment by running:
   ```
   conda activate denbi
   ```

6. Add S3 config for our public SRA mirror on our Bielefeld Cloud site:
   ```
   mc alias set sra https://openstack.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de:8080 "" ""
   ```

7. List which files are available for SRA number `SRR3984908`:
   ```
   mc ls sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR398/008/SRR3984908
   ```

8. Check the size of these files
   ```
   mc du sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR398/008/SRR3984908
   ```

9. Search for SRA run accessions we want to analyse and check the sum of their size
   (this may take a while to complete):
   ```
   mc find --regex "SRR6439511.*|SRR6439513.*|ERR3277263.*|ERR929737.*|ERR929724.*"  sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq  -exec "  mc ls -r --json  {} " \
      |  jq -s 'map(.size) | add'  \
      | numfmt --to=iec-i --suffix=B --padding=7
   ```

   <details><summary>Show Explanation</summary>
      
    * `mc find` reports all files that have one of the following prefixes in their file name: `SRR6439511.`, `SRR6439513.`, `ERR3277263.`, `ERR929737.`, `ERR929724.`.
    *  `jq` uses the json that is produced by `mc find` and sums up the size of all files (`.size` field).
    * `numfmt` transforms the sum to a human-readable string.
   
   </details>

10. Take a few minutes to investigate other `mc` commands like `mc cat` by viewing the `mc` help page with `mc -h`.
    You can leave the help page by typing `q`. 

### 3.3 Run commands with more cores and plot your result

1. We created a MASH index out of selected genomes that were classified as  
   "greatest threat to human health" by the World Health Organisation (WHO)
   in 2017: https://www.who.int/news/item/27-02-2017-who-publishes-list-of-bacteria-for-which-new-antibiotics-are-urgently-needed 
   Please download the index:
   ```
   wget https://openstack.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de:8080/simplevm-workshop/genomes.msh
   ```

2. We created a file that points to the datasets that you have found in the previous chapter.
   Download the input file via:
   ```
   wget https://openstack.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de:8080/simplevm-workshop/reads.tsv
   ```
   You can inspect the file by using `cat`:
   ```
   cat reads.tsv
   ```
3. We will create a directory for the output for the following command. We will place an output
   file for every SRA ID.
   ```
   mkdir -p output
   ```

4. You can now run the commands from the first part with found datasets as input (this may take a while to complete):
   Create a function that we will run in prallel:
   ```
   search(){ 
      left_read=$(echo $1 | cut -d ' '  -f 1);  
      right_read=$(echo $1 | cut -d ' ' -f 2); 
      sra_id=$(echo ${left_read} | rev | cut -d '/' -f 1 | rev | cut -d '_' -f 1 | cut -d '.' -f 1);
      mc cat $left_read $right_read | mash screen -p 3 genomes.msh - \
          | sed "s/^/${sra_id}\t/g"  \
          | sed 's/\//\t/' > output/${sra_id}.txt ;
   }
   ```
   <details><summary>Show Explanation</summary>
   In order to understand what this function does let's take the following datasets as an example:
   <code>
   sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR643/001/SRR6439511/SRR6439511_1.fastq.gz    sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR643/001/SRR6439511/SRR6439511_2.fastq.gz
   </code>
   where
      
    * `left_read` is left file (`sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR643/001/SRR6439511/SRR6439511_1.fastq.gz`)
    * `right_read` is the right file (`sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR643/001/SRR6439511/SRR6439511_2.fastq.gz`)
    * `sra_id` is the prefix of the file name (`SRR6439511`)
    * `mc cat` streams the files into `mash screen` which is using the sketched genomes `genomes.msh`
       to filter the datasets.
    * Both `sed`s are just post-processing the output and place every match in the `output` folder.

   </details>
   
   Export this function, so that we can use it in the next command.
   ```
   export -f search
   ```
   Run your analysis in parallel.
   ```
   parallel -a reads.tsv search
   ```
   where
     * `reads.tsv` is a list of datasets that we want to scan.
     * `search` is the function that we want to call.
   
   
6. Optional: This command will run a few minutes. You could open a second terminal
   and inspect the cpu utilization with `htop`.
   ![](figures/htop.png)

7. Concatenate all results into one file via 
   ```
   cat output/*.txt > output.tsv
   ```

8. Let's plot how many genomes we have found against the number of their matched k-mer hashes:
   ```
   csvtk -t plot hist -H -f 3 --xlab "Matched K-mer Hashes" \
    --ylab "Found Datasets" --title "Mash Results " output.tsv -o output.pdf
   ```
   You can open this file by a click on the Explorer View and selecting the pdf. 
   ![](figures/openpdf.png)

9. Get the title and the environment name of the found datasets by using Entrez tools. 
   ```
   for sraid in $(ls -1 output/ | cut -f 1 -d '.'); do  
     esearch -db sra -query ${sraid} \
       | esummary \
       | xtract -pattern DocumentSummary -element @ScientificName,Title \
       | sort | uniq  \
       | sed "s/^/${sraid}\t/g"; 
   done > publications.tsv
   ```
    
   <details><summary>Show Explanation</summary>
    * `for sraid in $(ls -1 output/ | cut -f 1 -d '.');` iterates over all datasets found in the output
      directory.
    * `esearch` just looks up the scientific name and title of the SRA study.
    * 'sed' adds the SRA ID to the output table. The first column is the SRA ID, the second column is 
       the scientific name and the third column is the study title.
    * All results are stored the `publications.tsv` file.
   </details>

In Part 4 of the workshop, we will take a closer look at the results.

### 3.4 Clean up resources

We will now save the generated data to a volume and delete the VM, since we will analyse the results using a Research Environment with a new VM
in the next section.

1. Set correct permissions on your volume:
   ```
   sudo chown ubuntu:ubuntu /vol/data/
   ```

2. Copy your results to the volume for later use:
   ```
   cp publications.tsv output.tsv /vol/data
   ```

3. Go to the **Instances** page and open the dropdown menu and click on the volume management button.
   ![](figures/manageVolumeButton.png)

   On the volumes details page detach the volume.
   ![](figures/detachVolumeButton.png)

4. Finally, since you saved your output data you can safely delete the VM.

Back to [Section 2](part2.md) | Next to [Section 4](part4.md)

Commit message:

fix(part3): explain search function

part3.md, after:

## Section 3: Access S3 and scale up your analysis vertically

In Parts 1 and 2, you tested the SimpleVM environment and the tools required for our analysis.
Now it is time to use a VM with more cores to scale up the analysis vertically. 

In the previous part, you saved your installed tools by creating a snapshot.
If the snapshot upload has not been completed, we have prepared a snapshot for you. You will now reuse this snapshot with a larger flavour.
Next, we will search for more metagenomic datasets via object storage and scale up our analysis by allocating more cores.

### 3.1 Create a new VM based on your snapshot

1. Click on **Snapshots** in left menu and check which status
   your snapshot has. You can also filter of the name in the top menu. 
   If it has the status `active`, you can click on the snapshot to open the dropdown menu and click on start to spawn a new VM.
   In case your snapshot is still not active just choose the **SimpleVMGCB-de32e** snapshot. You will now be redirected to the **Create new Instance** page with a
   preselected snapshot.
   ![](figures/snapshot_overview.png)

2. Provide again a name for your instance. Please use your name without any spaces (e.g. Max Mustermann -> MaxMusterman).

3. In the flavors sections please choose the **de.NBI large** flavor which has 28 cores available.
   ![](figures/large_flavor.png)

4. Please create a volume for your VM and enter your name without whitespace 
   (Example: Max Mustermann -> MaxMusterman) as the volume name. 
   Enter `data` (`/vol/data`) as mountpath and provide 1 GB as the storage size.
   Don't forget to click on `Add Volume`. 
   ![](figures/createVolume.png)

5. Grant access to the workshop organizers. This way the organizers get ssh access to your VM and can help you in case something does not work as expected. 
   ![](figures/grantAccess.png)

6. Confirm the checkbox and click on **Start Instance**.
   ![](figures/start_instance.png)

### 3.2 Interact with the SRA Mirror and search for more datasets to analyze

1. You are now on the **Instances** page. You can delete your old VM which is stopped and
   we used to create your snapshot. To do this, open the dropdown of the old machine again
   and select **Delete**. Confirm the deletion of the machine.
   ![](figures/deleteOldVM.png)
   
2. On your new VM, select again the link to access Theia IDE.
   ![](figures/howtoconnectbig.png)

3. Click on `Terminal` in the upper menu and select `New Terminal`.
   ![](figures/terminal.png)

4. Activate the conda environment by running:
   ```
   conda activate denbi
   ```

6. Add S3 config for our public SRA mirror on our Bielefeld Cloud site:
   ```
   mc alias set sra https://openstack.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de:8080 "" ""
   ```

7. List which files are available for SRA number `SRR3984908`:
   ```
   mc ls sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR398/008/SRR3984908
   ```

8. Check the size of these files
   ```
   mc du sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR398/008/SRR3984908
   ```

9. Search for SRA run accessions we want to analyse and check the sum of their size
   (this may take a while to complete):
   ```
   mc find --regex "SRR6439511.*|SRR6439513.*|ERR3277263.*|ERR929737.*|ERR929724.*"  sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq  -exec "  mc ls -r --json  {} " \
      |  jq -s 'map(.size) | add'  \
      | numfmt --to=iec-i --suffix=B --padding=7
   ```

   <details><summary>Show Explanation</summary>
      
    * `mc find` reports all files that have one of the following prefixes in their file name: `SRR6439511.`, `SRR6439513.`, `ERR3277263.`, `ERR929737.`, `ERR929724.`.
    *  `jq` uses the json that is produced by `mc find` and sums up the size of all files (`.size` field).
    * `numfmt` transforms the sum to a human-readable string.
   
   </details>

10. Take a few minutes to investigate other `mc` commands like `mc cat` by viewing the `mc` help page with `mc -h`.
    You can leave the help page by typing `q`. 

### 3.3 Run commands with more cores and plot your result

1. We created a MASH index out of selected genomes that were classified as  
   "greatest threat to human health" by the World Health Organisation (WHO)
   in 2017: https://www.who.int/news/item/27-02-2017-who-publishes-list-of-bacteria-for-which-new-antibiotics-are-urgently-needed 
   Please download the index:
   ```
   wget https://openstack.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de:8080/simplevm-workshop/genomes.msh
   ```

2. We created a file that points to the datasets that you have found in the previous chapter.
   Download the input file via:
   ```
   wget https://openstack.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de:8080/simplevm-workshop/reads.tsv
   ```
   You can inspect the file by using `cat`:
   ```
   cat reads.tsv
   ```
3. We will create a directory for the output for the following command. We will place an output
   file for every SRA ID.
   ```
   mkdir -p output
   ```

4. In the following you will reuse the mash command and use the downloaded files as input (this may take a while to complete):
   Create a function that we will run in prallel:
   ```
   search(){ 
      left_read=$(echo $1 | cut -d ' '  -f 1);  
      right_read=$(echo $1 | cut -d ' ' -f 2); 
      sra_id=$(echo ${left_read} | rev | cut -d '/' -f 1 | rev | cut -d '_' -f 1 | cut -d '.' -f 1);
      mc cat $left_read $right_read | mash screen -p 3 genomes.msh - \
          | sed "s/^/${sra_id}\t/g"  \
          | sed 's/\//\t/' > output/${sra_id}.txt ;
   }
   ```
   <details><summary>Show Explanation</summary>
   In order to understand what this function does let's take the following datasets as an example:
   <code>
   sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR643/001/SRR6439511/SRR6439511_1.fastq.gz    sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR643/001/SRR6439511/SRR6439511_2.fastq.gz
   </code>
   where
      
    * `left_read` is left file (`sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR643/001/SRR6439511/SRR6439511_1.fastq.gz`)
    * `right_read` is the right file (`sra/ftp.era.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/SRR643/001/SRR6439511/SRR6439511_2.fastq.gz`)
    * `sra_id` is the prefix of the file name (`SRR6439511`)
    * `mc cat` streams the files into `mash screen` which is using the sketched genomes `genomes.msh`
       to filter the datasets.
    * Both `sed`s are just post-processing the output and place every match in the `output` folder.

   </details>
   
   Export this function, so that we can use it in the next command.
   ```
   export -f search
   ```
   Run your analysis in parallel.
   ```
   parallel -a reads.tsv search
   ```
   where
     * `reads.tsv` is a list of datasets that we want to scan.
     * `search` is the function that we want to call.
   
   
6. Optional: This command will run a few minutes. You could open a second terminal
   and inspect the cpu utilization with `htop`.
   ![](figures/htop.png)

7. Concatenate all results into one file via 
   ```
   cat output/*.txt > output.tsv
   ```

8. Let's plot how many genomes we have found against the number of their matched k-mer hashes:
   ```
   csvtk -t plot hist -H -f 3 --xlab "Matched K-mer Hashes" \
    --ylab "Found Datasets" --title "Mash Results " output.tsv -o output.pdf
   ```
   You can open this file by a click on the Explorer View and selecting the pdf. 
   ![](figures/openpdf.png)

9. Get the title and the environment name of the found datasets by using Entrez tools. 
   ```
   for sraid in $(ls -1 output/ | cut -f 1 -d '.'); do  
     esearch -db sra -query ${sraid} \
       | esummary \
       | xtract -pattern DocumentSummary -element @ScientificName,Title \
       | sort | uniq  \
       | sed "s/^/${sraid}\t/g"; 
   done > publications.tsv
   ```
    
   <details><summary>Show Explanation</summary>
    * `for sraid in $(ls -1 output/ | cut -f 1 -d '.');` iterates over all datasets found in the output
      directory.
    * `esearch` just looks up the scientific name and title of the SRA study.
    * 'sed' adds the SRA ID to the output table. The first column is the SRA ID, the second column is 
       the scientific name and the third column is the study title.
    * All results are stored the `publications.tsv` file.
   </details>

In Part 4 of the workshop, we will take a closer look at the results.

### 3.4 Clean up resources

We will now save the generated data to a volume and delete the VM, since we will analyse the results using a Research Environment with a new VM
in the next section.

1. Set correct permissions on your volume:
   ```
   sudo chown ubuntu:ubuntu /vol/data/
   ```

2. Copy your results to the volume for later use:
   ```
   cp publications.tsv output.tsv /vol/data
   ```

3. Go to the **Instances** page and open the dropdown menu and click on the volume management button.
   ![](figures/manageVolumeButton.png)

   On the volumes details page detach the volume.
   ![](figures/detachVolumeButton.png)

4. Finally, since you saved your output data you can safely delete the VM.

Back to [Section 2](part2.md) | Next to [Section 4](part4.md)
